feat(root): added dark mode guidance (#1232)
mi6/ic-design-system: src/content/structured/get-started/custom-theme.mdx

navPriority: 9

date: "2024-12-02"

title: "Custom theme"

> subTitle: "How to change the colours of some components."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subTitle: "How to change the theme and brand colours of some components."
```

Reviewer: Title of the page should probably be "Custom theme and branding"

subTitle: "How to change the theme colour of some components."
subTitle: "How to change the colours of some components."

contribute: "https://github.com/mi6/ic-design-system/tree/main/src/content/structured/get-started/custom-theme.mdx"
---

import { useState } from "react";
import { IcAlert, IcButton, IcTheme } from "@ukic/react";

## Customising component colours

> Some components can have their theme colour changed by using either of the methods below. When the theme colour is changed, components will automatically update.

Reviewer: Think it would be good to have a paragraph above this section explaining the difference between theming and branding in the ICDS

Author: I'm adding a couple of lines in. Let me know what you think

> Components that follow the 'brand' colour will not update in the same way as other components when adapting to dark mode. Instead their appearance will only adjust to match the contrast of the 'brand' colour.

Reviewer 2: Should we have an ic-theme prop table now it's functionality has expanded, to show what the options are?

> <ic-theme color="#5c0949"></ic-theme>

Reviewer 2: Awaiting this work to implement the website changes for this: https://github.com/mi6/ic-ui-kit/issues/2318

Reviewer 2: Sounds like @ad9242 is aiming to get this in after demo, so might need a follow up ticket to be made (and let me know the number) to do this as soon as demo is over, with it not being done here

};
const useStyles = createUseStyles({
  themeContainer: {
    border: "1px solid var(--ic-architectural-white)",
    padding: "var(--ic-space-sm)"
  },
});
const classes = useStyles();
<>
  {shortCode}
</>`,
        },
      ],
    },
  },
];

export const DarkModeExample = () => {
  const [theme, setTheme] = useState("light");
  const handleClick = () => {
    setTheme(theme === "light" ? "dark" : "light");
  };
  return (
    <>
      <IcButton onClick={handleClick}>Update ic-theme</IcButton>
      <IcTheme
        theme={theme}
        style={{
          border: "1px solid var(--ic-architectural-white)",
          padding: "var(--ic-space-sm)",
        }}
      >
        <IcAlert
          heading="Set at component level"
          variant="info"
          theme="light"
        />
        <IcAlert heading="Inherits from ic-theme" variant="info" />
      </IcTheme>
      <IcAlert heading="Inherits from system/browser settings" variant="info" />
    </>
  );
};

<ComponentPreview
  style={{
    flexDirection: "column",
    gap: "var(--ic-space-sm)",
    background: "#333333",
  }}
  snippets={snippetsDefault}
>
  <DarkModeExample />
</ComponentPreview>

## Monochrome

> The `monochrome` prop can be set to `true` to remove the colour from components to help them display on certain backgrounds. It will display as black and white whilst adjusting to the dark mode inheritance mentioned above.

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if there should be some description on how the colours of monochrome change, between light and dark mode?

Author: Isn't it different for each component? Think the individual component examples should cover this

Reviewer 2: Yeah it does, but I'm not sure if this makes it clear, that as you switch between dark and light mode, the actual colour will change here (even if we don't specify what it is). I wasn't sure if the last sentence was trying to say that, but I wasn't clear, when I knew it

> <ComponentPreview style={{ gap: "var(--ic-space-sm)" }}>

Reviewer 2: This doesn't display as monochrome, also should this have the code below it?

Author: As above, monochrome props/styles not in the package yet for button

> Another part of ICDS version 3.0, the `appearance` prop has been replaced with a boolean `monochrome` prop. This prop performs a similar function, to remove the colour from components to help them display on certain backgrounds, however the key difference is that by setting `monochrome` to `true`, it will display as black and white whilst adjusting to the dark mode inheritance mentioned above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This prop removes the colour from components to help them display on certain backgrounds, by setting `monochrome` to `true` it will display as black and white whilst adjusting to the dark mode inheritance mentioned above.
```

<ic-theme color="#5c0949"></ic-theme>
```

The components that use the 'brand' colour are:

- [Footer](/components/footer)
- [Hero](/components/hero)
- [Side navigation](/components/side-navigation)
- [Top navigation](/components/top-navigation)

### Theme details

<ComponentDetails component="ic-theme" />

> ## Dark mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Dark mode as a theme
```

> Each component's variants can be displayed using dark mode colours. This creates better colour contrast with backgrounds, borders and text for when components need to be used on dark backgrounds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each component's variants can be displayed using dark mode colours. This creates better colour contrast with backgrounds, borders and text for when components need to be used on dark backgrounds.
```
I'm not clear on what you are trying to communicate in this paragraph? The benefits of dark mode?

Author: I guess a section on why dark mode is a thing, what its intended to be used for?

> Each component has been given a `theme` prop, taking values of `inherit` (default), `light` and `dark`. By setting the value to either `light` or `dark` at the component level, those components will display dark mode colours, independent of any higher level themes or system settings.

Reviewer: Not all components have the theme prop. I think this should be communicated as it currently reads as all components have the theme prop

By leaving the theme prop as the default value (`inherit`), it will decide the colours based on either a high-level `ic-theme` component, or if one does not exist, the browser/system settings.

> ### Dark mode example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example
```

> See the [Dark mode pattern](/patterns/dark-mode) for an example of how to implement dark mode into an application. When implementing dark mode into an app without an `ic-theme` wrapper, the components will default to the browser/system settings unless overridden manually. This will need to be accounted for to prevent unintended styling issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When there is no `ic-theme` wrapper present in an app, ICDS components will default to the browser/system settings. This is unless they are overridden manually.  For a full example on how to implement dark mode into an application, see our [dark mode pattern](/patterns/dark-mode). 
```
"This will need to be accounted for to prevent unintended styling issues." - what do you mean by this? What unintended styling issues are you referring to?
